German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
List of Contents:
Overview: 2
Objectives: 3
Project Regulations: 4
Project Milestones Overview: 5
Project Milestones Requirements: 6
Project Remarks and Resources: 10
1German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
Overview:
The main objective of the Robotics Programming (MCTR911) course is to go through the
robotic systems challenges. One of these challenges is to derive the robotic systems
equations of motion through modeling of the robotic manipulators using both kinematic
and dynamic approaches. Another challenge is to obtain the desired trajectory for either
the manipulator’s end effector or its joints to be followed by the manipulator to reach its
destination. And finally, to control the robot’s motion to follow the designated trajectory
to close the loop of the whole system.
All these challenges are going to be highlighted and tackled in the course project, as
students will learn how to model a robotic system and how to control its motion to
perform the desired task successfully and efficiently. Students will also have the chance
to visualize the motion of your created robot and build an interactive GUI with a full
environment for the robot in an industrial application through the use of ROS2 and
MuJoCo connecting coded by Python or other simulator of your choice (teams that
choose to use other simulators are expected to be able to debug its problems
themselves). This document is to introduce the Robotics course project objectives
highlighting the project’s regulations and draft milestones plan including a brief
description for each milestone, the milestone weight and expected deadline.
2German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
Objectives:
The robot which is of interest in this year’s project is Industrial Robotics (Several designs
are present online as Open Source XML models). The objectives of the project are mainly
to be able to model and analyze the robotic arm (obtain the kinematics, trajectory and
control the arm to perform the desirable industrial motion) using ROS2 and Python to be
used in Industrial Robotics Applications. In addition, build a simulation environment of
the visualization of the limb’s motion through MuJoCo. Furthermore, build a GUI of the
selected robotic arm in an industrial application environment performing the desirable
movements.
3German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
Project Regulations:
• The project team consists of 4-6 members cross tutorials.
• Each team is required to simulate and analyze a robotic arm (4-7 DoF) to
perform an industrial robotics application which should be chosen based on
literature review.
• Each team will work on a single robotic arm to simulate its motion in the GUI
and for the industrial robotic application chosen.
• Students that are not assigned to teams are going to be randomly clustered and
get assigned to a random project.
• Registration of less than 4 members or more than 6 members will NOT be
considered and the project selection will be canceled.
• Once the team is formed, NEITHER changes in the team’s members NOR in the
assigned project will be acceptable.
• The evaluation process of each milestone will follow the following procedures
based on the milestone requirements:
o Online Submissions: Each team will be requested to submit the
requirements of the milestone through GitHub. These requirements may
include: reports, narrated presentations, codes, videos and others. Each
team will have a repository on GitHub to share folders with team
members and course instructors.
o Evaluations: Two evaluations will be conducted throughout the project,
the evaluations timings are presented below. Evaluation method will be
announced soon.
4German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
Project Milestones Overview:
● The project weight is 30%.
● The project is divided into 5 milestones covering all the course content.
● Each milestone is weighted based on the complexity of the requirements.
● All milestones will include a simulation platform for coding. The simulation
platforms required for the course are MuJoCo utilizing ROS2 and Python (you
are free to choose whatever simulator you like, but you will have to ensure it
work)
● Visualization of the robot’s motion is required
● You will be asked to search for available models for a robotic arm. The course
team will choose 2-3 robots for each team to select one and start simulating the
robot’s motion and building the GUI.
● Each team will construct a suitable full simulation environment based on the
selected industrial application, ex.: robot assembling Legos, the robot and a
worker are moving objects in an industrial sector which should be shown through
a simulator of your choice (the course team should approve using this simulator).
5German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
Project Milestones Requirements:
Milestone Expected
Deliverables %
# Deadline
Requirements:
• Project registration: each team required to
register through a Google form:
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSd3 Friday
Registration azhk2VRIligOnh2P6hSKF6fP_kPhRG5vTkl7cOomQ 3rd of October, 0%
TAb3w/viewform?usp=dialog 2025
• The team members are required to fill their
names, IDs, the priorities, a contact person’s email
to contact in case of any problems
Requirements:
• State the selected application and propose a
draft project flow to serve your selected
industrial robotic application.
• Search for available models having 4-7 degrees
of freedom (number of motors).
• Download ROS2 and MuJoCo (you can choose a
simulator other than MuJoCo). Documentation
is on the CMS.
• If you would like to use another simulator,
Wednesday
Milestone
mention the simulator and provide us with a 8th of October,
01 5%
video you have done previously with it. 2025
• Each team member should have an account on
GitHub and create one repository for each team
(documentation will be available on CMS).
To be submitted:
● Github Repository Link containing a folder
named “Milestone 01” including all the
following:
- One/Two page literature review.
- Robotic manipulator CAD models.
- Video of the software (ROS2, simulator).
6German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
Requirements:
• Assign the frames on the robotic arm (on paper
or by the help of the frames present in the
simulator used).
• Develop the DH convention of the robot.
• Obtain the robotic arm Forward and Inverse
Position Kinematics using Python.
• Place the model in MuJoCo or the chosen
simulator through the linking between ROS2 and
the simulator by integrating it with Python. Links
will be provided.
• Analyze and visualize the motion of the limb by
actuating the joints using constants, signal
builders and sliders as inputs to the simulation
environment
• Start building the GUI of the environment Wednesday
22th of
Milestone To be submitted:
02 October, 2025 7%
• Create another folder in the previously created
GitHub repository named “Milestone 02”
including the following:
– A Report (Word or Latex format) having the
performed DH convention, forward
kinematics
– Codes of the forward kinematics analysis and
the visualization of the robot’s motion.
– Video for the simulations performed on the
simulator including the building process of the
environment’s GUI.
7German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
Requirements:
• Derive the Forward and Inverse Velocity
Kinematics of the robotic arm using Python.
• Derive the Forward and Inverse Acceleration
Kinematics of the robotic arm on Python.
• Test the equations of the Forward and Inverse
Position and Velocity Kinematics obtained on
the chosen simulator by inputting joint
angles/angular velocities/angular accelerations
and sensing the position/velocities/accelerations
of the end effector and the inverse process to be
the same as that obtained by the kinematic
equations with simple tolerance.
• Continue building the GUI process which
Wednesday
includes all the environment components;
12th
chairs, conveyors, people, tools, etc.
of November,
To be submitted: 7%
2025
• Create another folder in the previously created +
GitHub repository named “Milestone 03” Evaluation
Milestone
including the following:
03
– Video of the kinematics validation in a
simulation commenting on the results.
– Report having the steps of the performed
analysis of the velocity kinematics and
acceleration kinematics
– Codes of the forward and inverse velocity
kinematics and the robot’s motion
visualization
– Videos for the created GUI.
– Videos for testing the kinematics equations
obtained on the model by inputting joint
angles and sensing the end effector’s position
to be the same as that obtained by the
kinematic equations with simple tolerance.
8German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
Requirements:
• Derive Task-Space trajectories for the arm’s end
effector to follow using Python.
• Derive Joint-Space trajectory for the robot’s
joints to follow using Python.
• Validate the simulated Task-Space trajectories
for the arm’s end effector to follow on ROS2 and
the simulator
• Validate the simulated Joint-Space trajectories
for the robot’s joints to follow on ROS2 and the
simulator
Milestone • Send the joint angles required to perform the Wednesday
04 26th 6%
task-space trajectory and the joint-space
of November,
trajectory to the simulator to perform the
2025
desirable motion in the created GUI.
To be submitted:
• Create another folder in the previously created
GitHub repository named “Milestone 04”
including the following:
– Videos of the trajectory validation in a
simulation commenting on the results.
– Codes of the and trajectory tracking analysis
using joint-space and task-space and the
visualization of the robot’s motion
Requirements:
• Derive position control algorithms for the motor
level control
• Test the closed loop system taking into
consideration the robot’s visualization tool Wednesday
• Perform the desired industrial application. 10th of
Milestone To be submitted: December,
05 2025 5%
• Create another folder in the previously created
+
GitHub repository named “Milestone 05”
Final Evaluation
including the following:
– Narrated presentation having ALL the steps
conducted in the project
– Report having ALL steps performed with
screenshots and analysis.
9German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
– Codes of the control equations of the arm and
the visualization
– Videos for the fully functioning simulation
10German University in Cairo (GUC)
Faculty of Engineering & Materials Science (EMS)
Mechatronics Department (MCTR)
MCTR911-Robotics Programming Winter 2025
Project Description
Project Remarks and Resources:
** Registration is open starting from Thursday 29th of September, 2025 till Friday 3rd of
October, 2025. Link of the registration process can be found below:
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSd3azhk2VRIligOnh2P6hSKF6fP_kPhRG5vTkl7cOom
QTAb3w/viewform?usp=dialog
** Each team will Search for a model of a robotic manipulator having 4-7 degrees of freedom.
** A literature review on the most recent Industrial Robotic Applications will be conducted
by each team to propose an application for his arm.
** A detailed description for each milestone will be provided with all the required deliverables
and the submission details (links for submissions will be provided in each announcement).
** Teams will visualize the motion of the robot using MuJoCo or others (if approved).
** Full analysis of the robot using ROS2 and Python.
** Evaluations will take place within the semester for monitoring the progress of each team
and for grading purposes.
Best Wishes and Happy Semester,
Robotics Programming Team ☺
11